[M65] “On Dynamic Program Relocation” by W.C. McGee. IBM Systems Journal, Volume 4:3, 1965, pages 184–199. This paper is a nice summary of early work on dynamic relocation, as well as some basics on static relocation.

[P90] “Relocating loader for MS-DOS .EXE executable ﬁles” by Kenneth D. A. Pillay. Microprocessors & Microsystems archive, Volume 14:7 (September 1990). An example of a relocating loader for MS-DOS. Not the ﬁrst one, but just a relatively modern example of how such a system works.

[SS74] “The Protection of Information in Computer Systems” by J. Saltzer and M. Schroeder. CACM, July 1974. From this paper: “The concepts of base-and-bound register and hardware-interpreted descriptors appeared, apparently independently, between 1957 and 1959 on three projects with diverse goals. At M.I.T., McCarthy suggested the base-and-bound idea as part of the memory protection system necessary to make time-sharing feasible. IBM independently developed the base-and-bound register as a mechanism to permit reliable multiprogramming of the Stretch (7030) computer system. At Burroughs, R. Barton suggested that hardware-interpreted descriptors would provide direct support for the naming scope rules of higher level languages in the B5000 computer system.” We found this quote on Mark Smotherman’s cool history pages [S04]; see them for more information.

[S04] “System Call Support” by Mark Smotherman. May 2004. people.cs.clemson.edu/ ˜mark/syscall.html. A neat history of system call support. Smotherman has also collected some early history on items like interrupts and other fun aspects of computing history. See his web pages for more details.

[WL+93] “Efﬁcient Software-based Fault Isolation” by Robert Wahbe, Steven Lucco, Thomas E. Anderson, Susan L. Graham. SOSP ’93. A terriﬁc paper about how you can use compiler support to bound memory references from a program, without hardware support. The paper sparked renewed interest in software techniques for isolation of memory references.

[W17] Answer to footnote: “Is there anything other than havoc that can be wreaked?” by Waciuma Wanjohi. October 2017. Amazingly, this enterprising reader found the answer via google’s Ngram viewing tool (available at the following URL: http://books.google.com/ngrams). The answer, thanks to Mr. Wanjohi: “It’s only since about 1970 that ’wreak havoc’ has been more popular than ’wreak vengeance’. In the 1800s, the word wreak was almost always followed by ’his/their vengeance’.” Apparently, when you wreak, you are up to no good, but at least wreakers have some options now.