[AKW88] “The AWK Programming Language” by Alfred V. Aho, Brian W. Kernighan, Peter J. Weinberger. Pearson, 1988 (1st edition). A concise, wonderful book about awk. We once had the pleasure of meeting Peter Weinberger; when he introduced himself, he said “I’m Peter Weinberger, you know, the ’W’ in awk?” As huge awk fans, this was a moment to savor. One of us (Remzi) then said, “I love awk! I particularly love the book, which makes everything so wonderfully clear.” Weinberger replied (crestfallen), “Oh, Kernighan wrote the book.”

[C00] “NFS Illustrated” by Brent Callaghan. Addison-Wesley Professional Computing Series, 2000. A great NFS reference; incredibly thorough and detailed per the protocol itself.

[ES03] “New NFS Tracing Tools and Techniques for System Analysis” by Daniel Ellard and Margo Seltzer. LISA ’03, San Diego, California. An intricate, careful analysis of NFS done via passive tracing. By simply monitoring network trafﬁc, the authors show how to derive a vast amount of ﬁle system understanding.

[HLM94] “File System Design for an NFS File Server Appliance” by Dave Hitz, James Lau, Michael Malcolm. USENIX Winter 1994. San Francisco, California, 1994. Hitz et al. were greatly inﬂuenced by previous work on log-structured ﬁle systems.

[K86] “Vnodes: An Architecture for Multiple File System Types in Sun U NIX” by Steve R. Kleiman. USENIX Summer ’86, Atlanta, Georgia. This paper shows how to build a ﬂexible ﬁle system architecture into an operating system, enabling multiple different ﬁle system implementations to coexist. Now used in virtually every modern operating system in some form.

[NT94] “Kerberos: An Authentication Service for Computer Networks” by B. Clifford Neuman, Theodore Ts’o. IEEE Communications, 32(9):33-38, September 1994. Kerberos is an early and hugely inﬂuential authentication service. We probably should write a book chapter about it sometime...

[O91] “The Role of Distributed State” by John K. Ousterhout. 1991. Available at this site: ftp://ftp.cs.berkeley.edu/ucb/sprite/papers/state.ps. A rarely referenced discussion of distributed state; a broader perspective on the problems and challenges.

[P+94] “NFS Version 3: Design and Implementation” by Brian Pawlowski, Chet Juszczak, Peter Staubach, Carl Smith, Diane Lebel, Dave Hitz. USENIX Summer 1994, pages 137-152. The small modiﬁcations that underlie NFS version 3.

[P+00] “The NFS version 4 protocol” by Brian Pawlowski, David Noveck, David Robinson, Robert Thurlow. 2nd International System Administration and Networking Conference (SANE 2000). Undoubtedly the most literary paper on NFS ever written.

[RO91] “The Design and Implementation of the Log-structured File System” by Mendel Rosenblum, John Ousterhout. Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP), 1991. LFS again. No, you can never get enough LFS.

[S86] “The Sun Network File System: Design, Implementation and Experience” by Russel Sandberg. USENIX Summer 1986. The original NFS paper; though a bit of a challenging read, it is worthwhile to see the source of these wonderful ideas.

[Sun89] “NFS: Network File System Protocol Speciﬁcation” by Sun Microsystems, Inc. Request for Comments: 1094, March 1989. Available: http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc1094.txt. The dreaded speciﬁcation; read it if you must, i.e., you are getting paid to read it. Hopefully, paid a lot. Cash money!

[V72] “La Begueule” by Francois-Marie Arouet a.k.a. Voltaire. Published in 1772. Voltaire said a number of clever things, this being but one example. For example, Voltaire also said “If you have two religions in your land, the two will cut each others throats; but if you have thirty religions, they will dwell in peace.” What do you say to that, Democrats and Republicans?