[B+19] “A fork() in the road” by Andrew Baumann, Jonathan Appavoo, Orran Krieger, Timothy Roscoe. HotOS ’19, Bertinoro, Italy. A fun paper full of fork()ing rage. Read it to get an opposing viewpoint on the U NIX process API. Presented at the always lively HotOS workshop, where systems researchers go to present extreme opinions in the hopes of pushing the community in new directions.

[C63] “A Multiprocessor System Design” by Melvin E. Conway. AFIPS ’63 Fall Joint Computer Conference, New York, USA 1963. An early paper on how to design multiprocessing systems; may be the ﬁrst place the term fork() was used in the discussion of spawning new processes.

[DV66] “Programming Semantics for Multiprogrammed Computations” by Jack B. Dennis and Earl C. Van Horn. Communications of the ACM, Volume 9, Number 3, March 1966. A classic paper that outlines the basics of multiprogrammed computer systems. Undoubtedly had great inﬂuence on Project MAC, Multics, and eventually U NIX.

[J16] “They could be twins!” by Phoebe Jackson-Edwards. The Daily Mail. March 1, 2016.. This hard-hitting piece of journalism shows a bunch of weirdly similar child/parent photos and is frankly kind of mesmerizing. Go ahead, waste two minutes of your life and check it out. But don’t forget to come back here! This, in a microcosm, is the danger of surﬁng the web.

[L83] “Hints for Computer Systems Design” by Butler Lampson. ACM Operating Systems Review, Volume 15:5, October 1983. Lampson’s famous hints on how to design computer systems. You should read it at some point in your life, and probably at many points in your life.

[QI15] “With Great Power Comes Great Responsibility” by The Quote Investigator. Available: https://quoteinvestigator.com/2015/07/23/great-power. The quote investigator concludes that the earliest mention of this concept is 1793, in a collection of decrees made at the French National Convention. The speciﬁc quote: “Ils doivent envisager qu’une grande responsabilit est la suite insparable d’un grand pouvoir”, which roughly translates to “They must consider that great responsibility follows inseparably from great power.” Only in 1962 did the following words appear in Spider-Man: “...with great power there must also come–great responsibility!” So it looks like the French Revolution gets credit for this one, not Stan Lee. Sorry, Stan.

[SR05] “Advanced Programming in the U NIX Environment” by W. Richard Stevens, Stephen A. Rago. Addison-Wesley, 2005. All nuances and subtleties of using U NIX APIs are found herein. Buy this book! Read it! And most importantly, live it.